README.md, before:

# webcimes-tooltip

Create and animate tooltips simply, for dropdowns tooltips and titles tooltips. It works with vanilla javascript + html + css and with floating-ui dependency.

Floating-ui is needed for intelligy placement of tooltips.

`webcimes-tooltip` also comes with full support for web accessibility and screen readers.

Once the `webcimes-tooltip` javascript is defined, we can simply call the WebcimesTooltip class with the desired options.

## Installation

Use the package manager npm to install webcimes-tooltip.

```bash
npm install webcimes-tooltip
```

### ESM
Compared to JS bundlers (like Webpack), using ESM in the browser requires you to use the full path and filename instead of the module name.
You can use an importmap to resolve the arbitrary module names to complete paths (not needed if you use JS bundlers):
```html
<html>
    <head>
		...
        <script type="importmap">
        {
            "imports": {
                "@floating-ui/dom": "./node_modules/@floating-ui/core/dist/floating-ui.core.esm.js",
                "webcimes-tooltip": "./node_modules/webcimes-tooltip/dist/js/webcimes-tooltip.esm.js"
            }
        }
        </script>
	</head>
	...
```

Then import javascript module:
```javascript
import { WebcimesTooltip } from "webcimes-tooltip";
```

Or you can also set the full path directly in the import:
```html
<html>
    <head>
		...
		<script type="module">
			// Import webcimes-tooltip
			import { WebcimesTooltip } from "./node_modules/webcimes-tooltip/dist/js/webcimes-tooltip.esm.js";
			...
		</script>
	</head>
	...
```

Or with JS bundlers (like Webpack) you can call directly the module :
```javascript
import { WebcimesTooltip } from "webcimes-tooltip";
```

### UDM
You can directly load the udm module in the script tag:
```html
<html>
    <head>
		...
        <script src="./node_modules/webcimes-tooltip/dist/js/webcimes-tooltip.udm.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
	</head>
	...
```

### Import stylesheet:
```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="./node_modules/webcimes-tooltip/dist/css/webcimes-tooltip.css">
```

## Usage

### Call `WebcimesTooltip` for create tooltip:
```javascript
// Wait for dom content loaded or call WebcimesTooltip before the end of body
document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", function()
{

    // Set tooltip button
    const tooltipButton = new WebcimesTooltip({
        type: "button", // Type (button tooltip or title tooltip), default "button"
        element: document.querySelector("button"), // Element (selector string or HTMLElement)
        setId: null, // set a specific id on the tooltip. default "null"
        setClass: null, // set a specific class on the tooltip, default "null"
        placement: "bottom", // Choose tooltip placement, default "bottom" for type "button" and "top" for type "title"
        delay: 0, // Delay before show the tooltip, default 0
        duration: 600, // Duration of animation for show the tooltip, default 600
        arrow: true, // Generate an arrow for the tooltip, default true
        style: null, // add extra css style to tooltip, default null
        ariaLabel: null, // set aria-label for the tooltip, default null
        beforeShow: () => {console.log("before show");}, // callback before show tooltip
        afterShow: () => {console.log("after show");}, // callback after show tooltip
        beforeHide: () => {console.log("before hide");}, // callback before hide tooltip
        afterHide: () => {console.log("after hide");}, // callback after hide tooltip
    });

    // Set tooltip title
    document.querySelectorAll("[title]").forEach((el) => {
        const tooltipTitle = new WebcimesTooltip({
            type: "title", // Type (button tooltip or title tooltip), default "button"
            element: el, // Element (selector string or HTMLElement)
            setId: null, // set a specific id on the tooltip. default "null"
            setClass: null, // set a specific class on the tooltip, default "null"
            placement: 'top', // Choose tooltip placement, default "bottom" for type "button" and "top" for type "title"
            delay: 400, // Delay before show the tooltip, default 0
            duration: 600, // Duration of animation for show the tooltip, default 600
            arrow: true, // Generate an arrow for the tooltip, default true
            style: null, // add extra css style to tooltip, default null
            ariaLabel: null, // set aria-label for the tooltip, default null
            hideOnHover: true, // Hide the tooltip when the mouse hover the tooltip (only for type "title"), default true
            beforeShow: () => {console.log("before show");}, // callback before show tooltip
            afterShow: () => {console.log("after show");}, // callback after show tooltip
            beforeHide: () => {console.log("before hide");}, // callback before hide tooltip
            afterHide: () => {console.log("after hide");}, // callback after hide tooltip
        });
    });
});
```

### Type of tooltip:
The `type` option can be set to `button` or `title`:

#### Button
If set to `button` it will be used as dropdown tooltip, also immediately after the button we need to set the drop-down tooltip that will be used by the button:
```html
<button data-tooltip-placement="bottom" data-tooltip-delay="0" data-tooltip-duration="600" data-tooltip-arrow="true">My button</button>
<div>
	My tooltip content
</div>
```
Note that the `div` tag immediately following the button, will be automatically hidden by `webcimes-tooltip`.

For accessibility, you can also focus the button and open the dropdown tooltip after pressing the `Enter` or `Space` key. Then you can also close the dropdown tooltip by pressing the `Esc` or `Tab` key.

#### Title
If set to `title`, the module will automatically replace the `title` attribute with `data-tooltip-title`.
```html
<button title="My title" data-tooltip-placement="top" data-tooltip-delay="400" data-tooltip-duration="600" data-tooltip-arrow="true" data-tooltip-hide-on-hover="true">My button</button>
```
For accessibility reasons, you can also automatically open the tooltip by focusing a natively focusable element like `<button>` or `<input>`.

If you want to open the tooltip with focus on a non-focusable element like `<div>` or `<span>`, you can define a `tabindex="0"` with a specific `role` to your element, ex:
```html
<div title="My title" tabindex="0" role="button">My button</div>
```

### Aria label:
You can set aria label for your button or title reference directly with the `aria-label` attribute like this:
```html
<button title="My title" aria-label="Label for my button">My button</button>
```

If you want to set the aria-label for the tooltip, you can use the `ariaLabel` attribute like this:
```javascript
const tooltip = new WebcimesTooltip({
    ariaLabel: "Label for the tooltip", // set aria-label for the tooltip, default null
});
```

### Other options:
The `placement`, `delay`, `duration`, `arrow` and `hideOnHover` attributes define the default attributes that will apply to all tooltips.

### HTML data attribute options:
The attribute `data-tooltip-placement`, `data-tooltip-delay`, `data-tooltip-duration`, `data-tooltip-arrow` and `data-tooltip-hide-on-hover` are optionnals, and it permit to set individual options for each tooltips created. Or you can also define this option directly from the js instance `WebcimesTooltip`.

### Get dom element
You can get the dom element of the current tooltip like this:

```javascript
// Get the instance
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip(...);

// Things

// Then get the dom element of the current tooltip
myTooltip.tooltip;
```

Or you can get the reference element of the tooltip (used on `element` option):

```javascript
// Get the instance
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip(...);

// Things

// Then get the dom reference element of the current tooltip
myTooltip.tooltipRef;
```

Or you can get the arrow element of the tooltip:

```javascript
// Get the instance
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip(...);

// Things

// Then get the dom element of the current tooltip arrow
myTooltip.tooltipArrow;
```

But with the option `type` set to `title` only `myTooltip.tooltipRef` will work (because the `tooltip` title is created on mouse-in and destroyed on mouse-out).

### Events:
Multiple events exist, which allow to interact with the tooltip at each step. You can use all events below: 

```javascript
const tooltip = new WebcimesTooltip({
	beforeShow: () => {console.log("before show");}, // callback before show tooltip
	afterShow: () => {console.log("after show");}, // callback after show tooltip
	beforeHide: () => {console.log("before hide");}, // callback before hide tooltip
	afterHide: () => {console.log("after hide");}, // callback after hide tooltip
});
```

You can also use `addEventListener` for get the events from the instance like this:

```javascript
// Get the instance
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip(...);

// Create an event on the current tooltip
myTooltip.tooltipRef.addEventListener("afterHide", () => {
	console.log("after hide");
});
// Create an event on the current tooltip
myTooltip.tooltip.addEventListener("afterHide", () => {
	console.log("after hide");
});
```
You can use `myTooltip.tooltipRef` or `myTooltip.tooltip` to attach it to `addEventListener`, both will have the same effect.
But with the option `type` set to `title` only `myTooltip.tooltipRef` will work to attach it to `addEventListener` (because the `tooltip` title is created on mouse-in and destroyed on mouse-out).

### Style tooltips:
You can style tooltips with `--tooltip-color`, `--tooltip-background`, `--tooltip-arrow-width`, `--tooltip-arrow-height` and `--tooltip-border-color`.

#### Style all tooltips:
```css
.webcimes-tooltip
{
	--tooltip-color: #fff;
	--tooltip-background: #222;
	--tooltip-border-color: #888;
	--tooltip-arrow-width: 8px;
	--tooltip-arrow-height: 8px;
}
```

#### Style only tooltip button:
```css
.webcimes-tooltip--button
{
	--tooltip-color: #fff;
	--tooltip-background: #222;
	--tooltip-border-color: #888;
	--tooltip-arrow-width: 8px;
	--tooltip-arrow-height: 8px;
}
```

#### Style only tooltip title:
```css
.webcimes-tooltip--title
{
	--tooltip-color: #fff;
	--tooltip-background: #222;
	--tooltip-border-color: #888;
	--tooltip-arrow-width: 8px;
	--tooltip-arrow-height: 8px;
}
```

### Add extra style to the select:
You can define the style of the select with `css`, but you can also use the `style` property which allows to directly add an additional style to the tooltip.

```javascript
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip({
	style: "background:red; color:cyan;",
});
```

## License
[MIT](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)

Commit message:

Add new option "content" for set the content without title or without next siblings for button. Feat to remove automatically the display attribute after initialisation

README.md, after:

# webcimes-tooltip

Create and animate tooltips simply, for dropdowns tooltips and titles tooltips. It works with vanilla javascript + html + css and with floating-ui dependency.

Floating-ui is needed for intelligy placement of tooltips.

`webcimes-tooltip` also comes with full support for web accessibility and screen readers.

Once the `webcimes-tooltip` javascript is defined, we can simply call the WebcimesTooltip class with the desired options.

## Installation

Use the package manager npm to install webcimes-tooltip.

```bash
npm install webcimes-tooltip
```

### ESM
Compared to JS bundlers (like Webpack), using ESM in the browser requires you to use the full path and filename instead of the module name.
You can use an importmap to resolve the arbitrary module names to complete paths (not needed if you use JS bundlers):
```html
<html>
    <head>
		...
        <script type="importmap">
        {
            "imports": {
                "@floating-ui/dom": "./node_modules/@floating-ui/core/dist/floating-ui.core.esm.js",
                "webcimes-tooltip": "./node_modules/webcimes-tooltip/dist/js/webcimes-tooltip.esm.js"
            }
        }
        </script>
	</head>
	...
```

Then import javascript module:
```javascript
import { WebcimesTooltip } from "webcimes-tooltip";
```

Or you can also set the full path directly in the import:
```html
<html>
    <head>
		...
		<script type="module">
			// Import webcimes-tooltip
			import { WebcimesTooltip } from "./node_modules/webcimes-tooltip/dist/js/webcimes-tooltip.esm.js";
			...
		</script>
	</head>
	...
```

Or with JS bundlers (like Webpack) you can call directly the module :
```javascript
import { WebcimesTooltip } from "webcimes-tooltip";
```

### UDM
You can directly load the udm module in the script tag:
```html
<html>
    <head>
		...
        <script src="./node_modules/webcimes-tooltip/dist/js/webcimes-tooltip.udm.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
	</head>
	...
```

### Import stylesheet:
```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="./node_modules/webcimes-tooltip/dist/css/webcimes-tooltip.css">
```

## Usage

### Call `WebcimesTooltip` for create tooltip:
```javascript
// Wait for dom content loaded or call WebcimesTooltip before the end of body
document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", function()
{

    // Set tooltip button
    const tooltipButton = new WebcimesTooltip({
        type: "button", // Type (button tooltip or title tooltip), default "button"
        element: document.querySelector("button"), // Element (selector string or HTMLElement) for the tooltip
        content: null, // Content element (selector string or HTMLElement) for the content of the tooltip, default null
        setId: null, // set a specific id on the tooltip. default "null"
        setClass: null, // set a specific class on the tooltip, default "null"
        placement: "bottom", // Choose tooltip placement, default "bottom" for type "button" and "top" for type "title"
        delay: 0, // Delay before show the tooltip, default 0
        duration: 600, // Duration of animation for show the tooltip, default 600
        arrow: true, // Generate an arrow for the tooltip, default true
        style: null, // add extra css style to tooltip, default null
        ariaLabel: null, // set aria-label for the tooltip, default null
        beforeShow: () => {console.log("before show");}, // callback before show tooltip
        afterShow: () => {console.log("after show");}, // callback after show tooltip
        beforeHide: () => {console.log("before hide");}, // callback before hide tooltip
        afterHide: () => {console.log("after hide");}, // callback after hide tooltip
    });

    // Set tooltip title
    document.querySelectorAll("[title]").forEach((el) => {
        const tooltipTitle = new WebcimesTooltip({
            type: "title", // Type (button tooltip or title tooltip), default "button"
            element: el, // Element (selector string or HTMLElement) for the tooltip
            content: null, // Content element (selector string or HTMLElement) for the content of the tooltip, default null
            setId: null, // set a specific id on the tooltip. default "null"
            setClass: null, // set a specific class on the tooltip, default "null"
            placement: 'top', // Choose tooltip placement, default "bottom" for type "button" and "top" for type "title"
            delay: 400, // Delay before show the tooltip, default 0
            duration: 600, // Duration of animation for show the tooltip, default 600
            arrow: true, // Generate an arrow for the tooltip, default true
            style: null, // add extra css style to tooltip, default null
            ariaLabel: null, // set aria-label for the tooltip, default null
            hideOnHover: true, // Hide the tooltip when the mouse hover the tooltip (only for type "title"), default true
            beforeShow: () => {console.log("before show");}, // callback before show tooltip
            afterShow: () => {console.log("after show");}, // callback after show tooltip
            beforeHide: () => {console.log("before hide");}, // callback before hide tooltip
            afterHide: () => {console.log("after hide");}, // callback after hide tooltip
        });
    });
});
```

### Type of tooltip:
The `type` option can be set to `button` or `title`:

#### Button
If set to `button` it will be used as dropdown tooltip, also immediately after the button we need to set the drop-down tooltip that will be used by the button:
```html
<button data-tooltip-placement="bottom" data-tooltip-delay="0" data-tooltip-duration="600" data-tooltip-arrow="true" style="display:none;">My button</button>
<div>
	My tooltip content
</div>
```
Note that the `div` tag immediately following the button will be automatically hidden by `webcimes-tooltip`. However, to avoid the element briefly appearing before being hidden by the script, it's better to initially set `display: none` in your CSS on the element. Once the script is loaded, the `display` style will be automatically removed.

If you prefer, you can also set the `content` option with a specific class or ID to target the content, eliminating the need to create an element immediately after the button.

For accessibility, you can also focus the button and open the dropdown tooltip after pressing the `Enter` or `Space` key. Then you can also close the dropdown tooltip by pressing the `Esc` or `Tab` key.

#### Title
If set to `title`, the module will automatically replace the `title` attribute with `data-tooltip-title`.
```html
<button title="My title" data-tooltip-placement="top" data-tooltip-delay="400" data-tooltip-duration="600" data-tooltip-arrow="true" data-tooltip-hide-on-hover="true">My button</button>
```
If you prefer, you can also set the `content` option with a specific class or ID to target the content, eliminating the need to create a title attribut. However, to avoid the element briefly appearing before being hidden by the script, it's better to initially set `display: none` in your CSS on the element. Once the script is loaded, the `display` style will be automatically removed.

For accessibility reasons, you can also automatically open the tooltip by focusing a natively focusable element like `<button>` or `<input>`.

If you want to open the tooltip with focus on a non-focusable element like `<div>` or `<span>`, you can define a `tabindex="0"` with a specific `role` to your element, ex:
```html
<div title="My title" tabindex="0" role="button">My button</div>
```

### Aria label:
You can set aria label for your button or title reference directly with the `aria-label` attribute like this:
```html
<button title="My title" aria-label="Label for my button">My button</button>
```

If you want to set the aria-label for the tooltip, you can use the `ariaLabel` attribute like this:
```javascript
const tooltip = new WebcimesTooltip({
    ariaLabel: "Label for the tooltip", // set aria-label for the tooltip, default null
});
```

### Other options:
The `placement`, `delay`, `duration`, `arrow` and `hideOnHover` attributes define the default attributes that will apply to all tooltips.

### HTML data attribute options:
The attribute `data-tooltip-placement`, `data-tooltip-delay`, `data-tooltip-duration`, `data-tooltip-arrow` and `data-tooltip-hide-on-hover` are optionnals, and it permit to set individual options for each tooltips created. Or you can also define this option directly from the js instance `WebcimesTooltip`.

### Get dom element
You can get the dom element of the current tooltip like this:

```javascript
// Get the instance
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip(...);

// Things

// Then get the dom element of the current tooltip
myTooltip.tooltip;
```

Or you can get the reference element of the tooltip (used on `element` option):

```javascript
// Get the instance
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip(...);

// Things

// Then get the dom reference element of the current tooltip
myTooltip.tooltipRef;
```

Or you can get the arrow element of the tooltip:

```javascript
// Get the instance
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip(...);

// Things

// Then get the dom element of the current tooltip arrow
myTooltip.tooltipArrow;
```

But with the option `type` set to `title` only `myTooltip.tooltipRef` will work (because the `tooltip` title is created on mouse-in and destroyed on mouse-out).

### Events:
Multiple events exist, which allow to interact with the tooltip at each step. You can use all events below: 

```javascript
const tooltip = new WebcimesTooltip({
	beforeShow: () => {console.log("before show");}, // callback before show tooltip
	afterShow: () => {console.log("after show");}, // callback after show tooltip
	beforeHide: () => {console.log("before hide");}, // callback before hide tooltip
	afterHide: () => {console.log("after hide");}, // callback after hide tooltip
});
```

You can also use `addEventListener` for get the events from the instance like this:

```javascript
// Get the instance
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip(...);

// Create an event on the current tooltip
myTooltip.tooltipRef.addEventListener("afterHide", () => {
	console.log("after hide");
});
// Create an event on the current tooltip
myTooltip.tooltip.addEventListener("afterHide", () => {
	console.log("after hide");
});
```
You can use `myTooltip.tooltipRef` or `myTooltip.tooltip` to attach it to `addEventListener`, both will have the same effect.
But with the option `type` set to `title` only `myTooltip.tooltipRef` will work to attach it to `addEventListener` (because the `tooltip` title is created on mouse-in and destroyed on mouse-out).

### Style tooltips:
You can style tooltips with `--tooltip-color`, `--tooltip-background`, `--tooltip-arrow-width`, `--tooltip-arrow-height` and `--tooltip-border-color`.

#### Style all tooltips:
```css
.webcimes-tooltip
{
	--tooltip-color: #fff;
	--tooltip-background: #222;
	--tooltip-border-color: #888;
	--tooltip-arrow-width: 8px;
	--tooltip-arrow-height: 8px;
}
```

#### Style only tooltip button:
```css
.webcimes-tooltip--button
{
	--tooltip-color: #fff;
	--tooltip-background: #222;
	--tooltip-border-color: #888;
	--tooltip-arrow-width: 8px;
	--tooltip-arrow-height: 8px;
}
```

#### Style only tooltip title:
```css
.webcimes-tooltip--title
{
	--tooltip-color: #fff;
	--tooltip-background: #222;
	--tooltip-border-color: #888;
	--tooltip-arrow-width: 8px;
	--tooltip-arrow-height: 8px;
}
```

### Add extra style to the select:
You can define the style of the select with `css`, but you can also use the `style` property which allows to directly add an additional style to the tooltip.

```javascript
const myTooltip = new WebcimesTooltip({
	style: "background:red; color:cyan;",
});
```

## License
[MIT](https://choosealicense.com/licenses/mit/)
